---
layout: docs
title: Type Classes
permalink: /docs/core/typeClasses/
---

# Type Classes

Freestyle `@module` serves the purpose of logically combining related Algebras that are frequently used together.
In the same way that architectures are traditionally built in layers where separation of concerns is paramount, Modules
help organize algebras in groups that can be arbitrarily nested.

Let’s first define a few algebras to illustrate how Modules work. We will start with some basic low-level style ops related to persistence, presentation and validation. In our Persistence related algebras, we have a few ops that can go against a DB and others to a Cache service or system. On the presentation side, an application can display or perform input validation.

At this point, we can group these different application concerns in modules.
Modules can be further nested so they become part of the tree that conforms an application or library:


This enables one to build programs that are properly typed and parameterized in a modular and composable way:


The `@module` annotation works in a similar way as the `@free` annotation, by generating all the boilerplate
and implicit machinery necessary to assemble apps and libraries based on `Free`.

## Automatic method implementations

From the abstract sub-module references, Freestyle creates implementations based on the 
implicit evidence of the members it finds declared. When App is expanded in the case above, 
a companion object will be generated that includes a class definition implementing `App[F[_]]`, 
where both `persistence` and `display` are based on the implicit evidence generated by `@free`, `@tagless`, and other `@module` annotations.

## Dependency Injection

Freestyle automatically generates implicit default instances and summoners in the '@free' and '@module' annotated companions, so that instances can be summoned implicitly at any point in an application.
Scala uses implicit instances in companion objects as part of its implicit resolution rules. To learn more about Scala implicits take a look at this great
post, [Implicit Design Patterns in Scala](http://www.lihaoyi.com/post/ImplicitDesignPatternsinScala.html) by Li Haoyi.

This gives the caller an opportunity to override the instances generated automatically by Freestyle at any point with explicit ones.

Freestyle also creates an implicit method which requires implicitly all the module dependencies and a convenient `apply` method which allows obtaining
Module instances in an easy way. As in `@free` this effectively enables implicits based Dependency Injection where you may choose to override implementations
using the implicits scoping rules, to place different implementations where appropriate.
This also solves all Dependency Injection problems automatically for all modules in applications that model their layers on modules with the `@module` annotation.

## Convenient type aliases

All companions generated with `@module` contain a convenient type alias `Op` that you can refer to and that points to the root ADT nodes of the most inner `@free` leaves.
Freestyle recursively walks the Module dependencies until it finds the deepest modules that contain `@free` smart constructors generating a properly aligned `Coproduct`
for all it's contained algebras. This allows contained algebras to be composed.

If you were to create this by hand, in the case of the example above, it will look like this:


Things get more complicated once the number of Algebras grows.
Fortunately, Freestyle automatically aligns all those for you and gives you an already aligned `Coproduct` of all algebras

So far, we’ve covered how Freestyle can help with building and composing module programs based on `Free`, but `Free` programs are useless without a runtime interpreter that can evaluate the `Free` structure.

Next, we will show you how `Freestyle` helps you simplify the way you define [runtime interpreters](../handlers/) for `Free` applications.
